---
layout: post
title: How to...
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
categories: [Gear]
---
Upcoming series of posts will be about gear. Difference will be that I'm taking a different tack from everyone else. Biggest problem in tactical world outside of fuddery, and somewhat related, is gear worship. Having the best brand, best model, most featured, piece of kit will not save you on its own. What most people do in this space with gear is fashion. Let that sink in. It is fashion.

It is essential to know how to use the kit, how to select something that matches your skill level, willingness to train with it, afford-ability, and features you will actually use and understand. I will not tell you to buy a certain model or brand. I may mention brands that generally have certain properties or are safe bets, but also why. I will tell you the key things to look for when selecting a quality piece of kit, especially when evaluating a newcomer. Sometimes getting a new company's product offering you can get a fantastic deal on an incredibly high quality item precisely because you aren't paying for name and reputation. I'll relay my experience of features that are really slick or game changers and those that sound nice but get in the way in practice or never get used.

<!--more-->

My current list of categories are
- Armor
- Conceal Carry. Primarily belt, holster, garments, bags, etc. Might discuss weapon selection but only briefly.
- Flashlight
- Knife
- Medkit
- Pistol
- Rifle
- GPS/NAV
- Backpack, Bag